\documentclass[12pt]{article}
\usepackage[top=1.5cm, bottom=1.5cm, left=2cm, right=2cm]{geometry}
\usepackage{listings}
\usepackage{color} %red, green, blue, yellow, cyan, magenta, black, white
\usepackage{amsmath}
\usepackage{amssymb}
\usepackage{bm}
\usepackage{enumerate}
\usepackage{graphicx}
\usepackage{float}
\usepackage{hyperref}
\usepackage{multicol}
\usepackage{microtype} % improves typography
\usepackage{gfsdidot} % use the GFS Didot font:
                      % http://www.tug.dk/FontCatalogue/gfsdidot/
\usepackage[T1]{fontenc} % required for accented characters
\definecolor{mygreen}{RGB}{28,172,0} % color values Red, Green, Blue
\definecolor{mylilas}{RGB}{170,55,241}
\newcommand{\horrule}[1]{\noindent\rule{\linewidth}{#1}}
\pagenumbering{gobble}

\begin{document}

\noindent
\begin{minipage}[t]{.565\textwidth}
 \raggedright
 \large Henrique Aparecido Laureano,
 \noindent\rule{.89\linewidth}{1pt}\\
 \normalsize Brazilian from
 \href{https://goo.gl/K1Qcdv}{\color{blue}Curitiba}, 29 y/o,
 Statistician,\\Data Scientist with a Masters in Statistics and
 Numerical Methods in Engineering from 
 \href{https://goo.gl/DtVAbi}{\color{blue}UFPR}
\end{minipage}%
\begin{minipage}[t]{.435\textwidth}
 \raggedright
 Residence: Curitiba-PR-Brazil\\
 email:
 \href{mailto:henriquelaureano@outlook.com}{\color{blue}
   henriquelaureano@outlook.com}\\
 \hspace{1.2cm}
 \href{mailto:henriqueaparecidolaureano@gmail.com}{\color{blue}
   henriqueaparecidolaureano@gmail.com}\\
 URL:
 \href{https://henriquelaureano.github.io/}{
  \color{blue}\texttt{henriquelaureano.github.io}}\\
 \href{https://www.linkedin.com/in/henrique-laureano-025328179}{
  \color{blue}LinkedIn}
\end{minipage}

\vspace{0.5cm}
\horrule{1pt}

\vspace{-0.25cm}
\section*{Statement of Purpose}

I am writing to express my keen interest in securing a position as a Senior
Data Scientist within your esteemed organization. With a wealth of
international experience, advanced English skills, and a strong foundation in
statistical analysis and data science, I am excited to contribute my expertise
and drive data-driven insights for strategic decision-making.\\

In my previous roles as a statistician, biostatistician, and data scientist, I 
have successfully tackled complex problems by designing analytical strategies 
that deliver actionable insights and tangible business outcomes. I have 
collaborated with cross-functional teams, utilized statistical modeling and 
machine learning algorithms, and effectively communicated findings to 
stakeholders with varying levels of statistical expertise.\\

Continual learning and staying up-to-date with the latest advancements in 
statistical methodologies and data science techniques are integral to my 
professional growth. Actively participating in industry conferences and 
workshops, engaging with online communities, and exploring emerging tools have 
enhanced my skill set. Moreover, my advanced English proficiency facilitates 
effective collaboration with colleagues from diverse backgrounds.\\

By joining your organization, I aim to leverage my expertise in statistical 
analysis, predictive modeling, and data-driven decision-making to tackle
complex challenges and drive innovation. Your organization's reputation as an
industry leader in leveraging data for strategic initiatives aligns with my
aspirations. I am excited about the opportunity to collaborate with talented
professionals, engage in cutting-edge projects, and make a measurable impact on
your organization's growth and success.\\

In conclusion, as a dedicated statistician and data scientist, I believe that
my international experience, advanced English skills, and passion for
extracting insights from complex datasets make me a valuable addition to your
team. I look forward to discussing my qualifications further and demonstrating
my commitment to excellence in statistical analysis and data science within
your organization.\\

Thank you for considering my application. I eagerly await the opportunity to 
contribute to your company's mission and achieve new heights together.

\vspace{\fill}
\horrule{1pt}
\noindent Henrique Laureano, \hfill Page 1 of 1

\end{document}
